Politicians need to be aware of how issues of the day are affecting voter sentiment and satisfaction so that they can take political action as needed. Polling results give politicians an indication of voter satisfaction about current issues, but voter sentiment can quickly become entrenched, so it may be too late to take effective action if they wait until the next opinion polls become available for this information,  as irreversible damage may already have been done (Barone, 1997). A real-time, or near real-time indicator of voter sentiment would be enormously useful information for politicians to have access to. If they are able to quickly identify potential issues that need to be addressed, they could take action quickly on that matter, to avoid negative sentiment in the electorate from gaining momentum (Wang et al., 2012). 

The aim of this project was to develop a model that uses news headlines and social media posts to predict a politician’s satisfaction rating each day. The prototype model was developed for the current Prime Minister, but could be extended to other politicians, or a government entity or political party more broadly. The model used news headlines from Google search (google.com) and social media posts from Twitter (twitter.com) to predict his polling satisfaction rating with data taken from Wikipedia (Opinion Polling for the next Australian Federal Election, 2021). 

The project developed a web crawler that extracts and cleans news headlines from Google news and scrapes and cleans Twitter posts about the Prime Minister. Sentiment analysis was performed on the headlines and tweets and the sentiment scores were used in a predictive model to predict satisfaction rating. The model’s predictive ability was satisfactory and could be used to monitor potential changes in satisfaction rating, particularly in the context of current issues. If political staffers are uncertain of the political importance of an issue, the model may be able to give important, timely information on the political significance of the matter, rather than having to rely solely on intuition, or waiting for the next month’s polling data to arrive, when it might be too late to change the course of voter sentiment. 

